# Introduction
Just a quick heads up before we head off. It is really recommended for you to read the book this article is based on. Obviously, there's much more information than you're about to get here, but the authors of the book give really short, simple and at the same time completely sufficient for your survival advice. What this article is all about here is, however, compiling the more useful information for those who don't want to spend that much time on things they think they have a really low risk to encounter with. If you're more careful on life then it is, once again, advised for you to read the book, it's called "Scaling force" by Rory Miller and Lawrence A. Kane. And keep in mind that it's only about sharing the knowledge and understanding of what is written in there. It might save your life or arm and it might not. If you want to get completely sure it will, go search more information on the internet, read the book or even some more of a similar topic, follow the training courses or "drills" described in the book or in the internet sources you can actually trust. Once again, The authors of the book have a lot of experience, the point of this article is to spread the word and share at least a bit of knowledge and comprehension.
# What you should understand about self-defense in the first place
First of all, self-defense is not about beating your opponent to death (not always), it's about all you need to do to get as less harm as possible. If you can run or talk someone down - no harm at all. If the only thing you can do to save your life is to kill someone - not to die. Second of all, I bet you don't think about the jurisdictional consequences when you imagine how you kick an attacker in the throat and he falls down not breathing. All harm you do to an assailant, regardless HE may be the one who attacked first, should be justified in a court by you or your advocate (it best be the advocate). Cause here's what you probably have never thought about: when you injure or murder an attacker the punishment is still almost the same as if it was you who's been murdered or injured until you prove that it was truly self-defense. And it might be really tough to do because even a single detail as the fact that you could've not approached a suspicious person or react to a drunk's offensive language can be a big problem when you try to legitimate your actions.
## Levels of force
As mentioned, to figure things out you rarely have to appeal to violence just because no one actually wants to get hurt (except for some maniacs and other crazy people). Whether it's a "tough guy", who wants to show you who's boss of this gym, or a robber they don't want to fight, they want to get whatever they want. In the first case, the guy wants status, in the second, the man wants your purse, simple as that. So the first thing you're actually interested in is showing that it would be hard to fight you (or so simple that it won't get much status to anybody). The robbery situation is a bit more complex, because although criminals don't want the extra risk to spend half a life in a jail it's not very smart to let down your guard in any second because it's also pretty logical that killing you without leaving any traces would, on the other hand, decrease the risk. The thing is to understand that there's no universal strategy and you'll have to train yourself to quickly apply logic, knowledge, and experience to increase your chances of staying alive in tough situations and not getting into prison. That's why you should bear in mind these 6 levels of force and might be able to escalate to any real fast.