The goal of this technique is to make body contact with the person (usually combined with some calming words). For instance, tap him on his shoulder and say that everything is okay. If you want to be more careful try contacting the hand so you don't open to the person that much and also have a little bit of control when suddenly the potential threat tries to use his arms with bad intentions. But be careful! You shouldn't try to use that technique every time you face aggressive behavior. Here's why. To touch someone in a friendly way (if not, then it's not the right section) you should approach the person very close and become unprotected to show your friendly intentions. And it's pretty dangerous. You can do that only if you're really sure you're not gonna get hit. You can use that technique on your close friends, family members - people you know really well. If you're trying to friend up with a street thug when things get intense that might turn out terrible. Again, practice it on your friends when they're upset or angry. Read or listen to other people's stories about this kind of interaction so you know better what to do.
> ### Levels 4 to 6 restraint nonlethal force lethal force
> From level 4 to level 6 you're supposed to apply actual physical force. Now, even if you've been intuitively practicing levels 1-3 for your whole life and you can easily solve a tough situation on these levels just having some knowledge, levels 4 to 6 need training. If you don't go practicing in a dojo (special fighting hall) or, what's way more efficient, real-life drills then you're pretty much screwed. One of the issues is to control yourself when you're full of adrenaline. You barely can. So, the best tactic is to make your self-defense fully intuitive when it comes to quick action. That's why, further, there will be no extended information on that, cause if it makes sense to go training then it makes sense to learn different techniques (you can't learn much from what's written in this article), hire specialists, take special self-defense courses etc. Here's what is simple enough to be prepared without spending too much time and effort on things that, let's be honest, happen really rarely if you avoid troublesome places and people. The main advice is to take one or a few friends and make a "drill" - simulated assault situation where everyone starts doing slow motions turn by turn gradually increasing speed as you get more and more confident in your moves. Just be creative, an assault doesn't have a special sequence. Try different positions, places (environment), matchups. Also before training, you may look up on the internet (or in THE book) different takedown techniques, the nature of taking-down itself, videos, body maps, but be careful not to start swinging around and taking down your partner as you'd do in a real fight. You're training to feel, analyze and remember, so no need to apply too much force or be as fast as lightning.