Simply, it's pressure points and joint locks (pain and movement restriction). You better find body maps for pressure points, but as for joint locks - the better strategy is to understand how they actually work. The secret is hyperextension - try bending your wrist with one arm and applying force in the opposite direction with the muscles of the locked joint. Yeah, it's painful and really hard. The thing is that all mechanisms in our body work on the muscle contraction principle. When you extend the muscle the force applied to contract it back actually extends it even more causing hyperextension. So all you need to do is to extend the muscles that make the joint work. There are 3 types of joints: ball-and-socket (shoulder, the base of the fingers, hip), hinge (finger, elbow, knee), gliding joint (wrist). With ball-and-socket, you should rotate an arm around the axis (as if locking a joystick movement by pushing the stick to the edge). A hinge may be bent or straightened. In the first case, you put something inside an elbow, knee or finger an object (that might be a part of your body, but it better be some other object, maybe even a part of the attacker's body!) and bend it over the object. In the second case, you simply straighten the hinge (i.e. rotate out). Now wrist, simple as that, twist and bend, no matter which way (accept bending to the sides, in that case, bones meet and you can't bend any further). Now, a little bit about efficiency. First, it's obvious, but you need basing, without it the person can easily escape the lock by moving towards the force you're applying. So what you do is block the way of this movement. One, you lock the axis (joint) in one place so you can rotate the arm. Second, you lock the movement of the person, so there's no way to turn the rest of the body instead of tensing the muscles you're extending. To lock the axis you just push somewhere near it. To lock the person you push it against something. Other details you should figure out yourself when training or taking courses.
