As mentioned, to figure things out you rarely have to appeal to violence just because no one actually wants to get hurt (except for some maniacs and other crazy people). Whether it's a "tough guy", who wants to show you who's boss of this gym, or a robber they don't want to fight, they want to get whatever they want. In the first case, the guy wants status, in the second, the man wants your purse, simple as that. So the first thing you're actually interested in is showing that it would be hard to fight you (or so simple that it won't get much status to anybody). The robbery situation is a bit more complex, because although criminals don't want the extra risk to spend half a life in a jail it's not very smart to let down your guard in any second because it's also pretty logical that killing you without leaving any traces would, on the other hand, decrease the risk. The thing is to understand that there's no universal strategy and you'll have to train yourself to quickly apply logic, knowledge, and experience to increase your chances of staying alive in tough situations and not getting into prison. That's why you should bear in mind these 6 levels of force and might be able to escalate to any real fast.

**Level 1: Presence**
How you look and behave plays a big role in "victim evaluation". That is if you seem foolish and inattentive then it's a sign that it's easy to rob you if you behave cocky and disrespectful - that you need an "educational beat down" etc.
If you suspect anything, at least a snitch, carefully look around as you go. Your facial expression and your whole body should send a message to everyone that you're serious, prepared and know what to do in case something happens. That might scare off a lot more assailants than you think. You should also reconsider your style (clothing).

**Level 2: Voice**
You should really understand what things to say and how in different situations. For example, there's a technique that's based on one of our social instincts - conforming. When someone's angry and his speech is very loud and fast address a few words or a small sentence to him with the same voice and then start to speak calm and slow. Also, when you're attacked use your voice to attract other people's attention. When in a crowd and someone wants to show how "tough" he is say something like "Hey, I don't want any trouble" out loud. That not only may help you when things get jurisdictional, but also have a higher chance of someone from the crowd to react (interesting thing, if someone intrudes that doesn't "hurt" the attacker's status, you know, "hey, if not that stupid grandpa, I would have beaten that guy for sure"). Plus, you might remind the guy that you (actually both of you), obviously, don't want to fight. Again, every situation is different, this info may just give you a better understanding of what logic to apply when you're trying to get out of sketchy circumstances. Just explore human interaction either by reading specific books or practicing. Practicing is better, but that doesn't mean you should go and search for some trouble to solve.

**Level 3: Touch**
The goal of this technique is to make body contact with the person (usually combined with some calming words). For instance, tap him on his shoulder and say that everything is okay. If you want to be more careful try contacting the hand so you don't open to the person that much and also have a little bit of control when suddenly the potential threat tries to use his arms with bad intentions. But be careful! You shouldn't try to use that technique every time you face aggressive behavior. Here's why. To touch someone in a friendly way (if not, then it's not the right section) you should approach the person very close and become unprotected to show your friendly intentions. And it's pretty dangerous. You can do that only if you're really sure you're not gonna get hit. You can use that technique on your close friends, family members - people you know really well. If you're trying to friend up with a street thug when things get intense that might turn out terrible. Again, practice it on your friends when they're upset or angry. Read or listen to other people's stories about this kind of interaction so you know better what to do.

**Levels 4-6: Restraint, Nonlethal and Lethal Force**
From level 4 to level 6 you're supposed to apply actual physical force. Now, even if you've been intuitively practicing levels 1-3 for your whole life and you can easily solve a tough situation on these levels just having some knowledge, levels 4 to 6 need training. If you don't go practicing in a dojo (special fighting hall) or, what's way more efficient, real-life drills then you're pretty much screwed. One of the issues is to control yourself when you're full of adrenaline. You barely can. So, the best tactic is to make your self-defense fully intuitive when it comes to quick action. That's why, further, there will be no extended information on that, cause if it makes sense to go training then it makes sense to learn different techniques (you can't learn much from what's written in this article), hire specialists, take special self-defense courses etc. Here's what is simple enough to be prepared without spending too much time and effort on things that, let's be honest, happen really rarely if you avoid troublesome places and people. The main advice is to take one or a few friends and make a "drill" - simulated assault situation where everyone starts doing slow motions turn by turn gradually increasing speed as you get more and more confident in your moves. Just be creative, an assault doesn't have a special sequence. Try different positions, places (environment), matchups. Also before training, you may look up on the internet (or in THE book) different takedown techniques, the nature of taking-down itself, videos, body maps, but be careful not to start swinging around and taking down your partner as you'd do in a real fight. You're training to feel, analyze and remember, so no need to apply too much force or be as fast as lightning.
