We need stress because it has many positive benefits. Stress provides us with challenges; it gives us chances to learn about our values and strengths. Stress can show our ability to handle pressure without breaking. It tests our adaptability and flexibility, and can stimulate us to do our best. Because we usually do not consider unimportant events stressful, stress can also be an excellent indicator of the significance we attach to an event - in other words, it highlights what is important to us.We need to have *some* stress in our lives, but too much of anything can be bad. The goal is to have stress, but not an excess of it. Too much stress can take its toll on people and organizations. Too much stress leads to distress. Distress causes an uncomfortable tension that we try to escape or, preferably, avoid. Listed below are a few of the common signs of distress that you may encounter when faced with too much stress:* Difficulty making decisions* Angry outbursts* Forgetfulness* Low energy level* Constant worrying* Propensity for mistakes* Thoughts about death or suicide* Trouble getting along with others* Withdrawing from others* Hiding from responsibilities* CarelessnessAs you can see, stress can be constructive or destructive. It can encourage or discourage, move us along or stop us dead in our tracks, make life meaningful or seemingly meaningless. Stress can inspire you to operate successfully and perform at your maximum efficiency in a survival situation. It can also cause you to panic and forget all your training. The key to survival is your ability to manage the inevitable stresses you will encounter. The person that survives is one who works with her stresses instead of letting her stresses work on her.